Create pid_controller.markdown (#27381)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_integrations/pid_controller.markdown

---
title: PID Controller
description: Creates a PID controller to regulate a sensor value with a number-entity output.
ha_category:
  - Number
ha_release: '2023.05'
ha_iot_class: Local Polling
ha_domain: pid_controller
ha_platforms:
  - number
ha_integration_type: integration
---

> The `pid_controller` platform is a `number`. It can be used to control a number entity output to regulate a sensor value to a certain setpoint. The value of the number entity is the setpoint. As a sensor, any numerical senosor entity can be used. If two sensors are configured, the PID controller will act as a differential controller, using the difference between the two sensor values as input signal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `pid_controller` platform is a `number`. It can be used to control a number entity output to regulate a sensor value to a specific setpoint. The value of the number entity is the setpoint. As a sensor, any numerical sensor entity can be used. If two sensors are configured, the PID controller will act as a differential controller, using the difference between the two sensor values as input signal.
```

The value for the output number entity will be calculated using the Proportional–Integral–Derivative algorithm (PID, See [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PID_controller]). The implementation of the PID controller contains bumpless operation, and is prevented against integral windup by clipping of the output value to the minimum and maximum of the corresponding output number entity. 

> This controller is typically usefull in regulated systems, for example regulate the speed of a water pump in a heat collector to keep the temperature difference between the outgoing and incomming waterstream on a certain level, so that the heat collector will perform optimal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This controller is typically useful in regulated systems. For example, to regulate the speed of a water pump in a heat collector to keep the temperature difference between the outgoing and incoming water stream on a certain level, so that the heat collector will perform optimally.
```

## Configuration
{% include integrations/config_flow.md %}
{% configuration_basic %}
Name:
  description: The name that the PID controller should have. You can change it again later.
Output number entity:

>   description: Output number entity. The output of the regulator will be clipped to the min- and max value of this output number.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: Output number entity. The output of the regulator will be clipped to the minimum and maximum value of this output number.
```

Input sensor entity:
  description: Numerical sensor entity, used for input signal.
Optional secondary input sensor entity:
  description: Secondary input sensor. If selected, the regulator will work in differential mode.
Proportional gain factor (Kp):
  description: Proportional gain factor, directly gaining the error to compensate the fault (Kp).
Integration factor (Ki):
  description: Integration factor, reducing offset fault over time (Ki).
Differential factor (Kd):
  description: Differential factor, damping the overshoot (Kd).
Controller direction: 

>   description: When direct, output will increase to decrease fault, when reverse output will decrease to decrease fault.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: When 'direct', the output will increase to decrease fault. When 'reverse', the output will decrease to decrease fault.
```

Reviewer: I'm probably not the target audience of this text and maybe this is entirely clear to people who know their way around PID and PWM. How do I know what values to pick for kp, ki, and kd?

Author: Hm, value highly depends on the application of the regulator. I think those looking for a PID regulator know what they set up, and also they have an idea what they want to put there. But mayb I can think out some suggestions:
- For kp, start with a small number (1) and gradually make it bigger if you see that the direct reaction of the controller is too low.
- For ki, start with a very small number (0.01). If you see that the reaction  over time is only slowly rising, than increase it.
- For kd, keep this number to 0 until kp and ki are set. Now you can use the kd to prevent the regulator from overshoot. Only increase in small steps.

Minimum:
  description: Minimum regulation setpoint value.
Maximum:
  description: Maximum regulation setpoint value.
Duration between controller cycles
  description: Cycle time that elapses between two controller cycles.
Step size:
  description: Step size of the number.
Mode:
  description: Mode of user interface elements.
{% endconfiguration_basic %}

## YAML Configuration

> Alternatlively, this integration can be configured and set up manually via YAML

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, this integration can be configured and set up manually via YAML.
```

> instead. To enable the PID controller number entity in your installation, add the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable the PID controller number entity in your installation, add the
```

following to your `configuration.yaml` file:

```yaml
# Example configuration.yaml entry
number:
  - platform: pid_controller
    name: PID regulator for heat collector
    input1: sensor.water_temperature
    output: number.pwm_pump
``` 

{% configuration %}
name:
  description: Name of the PID controller.
  required: true
  type: string
output:

>   description: `entity_id` for output value, must be number device. Output will be limited to min- and maximum value of this number.

Reviewer: ``` suggestion
  description: `entity_id` for the output value. Must be a number device. The output will be limited to the minimum and maximum value of this number.
```

  required: true
  type: string
input1:

>   description: `entity_id` for input sensor, must be numerical sensor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: `entity_id` for the input sensor. Must be a numerical sensor.
```

  required: true
  type: string
input2:
  description: Optional secondary input sensor. If selected, the controller will work in differential mode.
  required: false
  default: 
  type: string
kp:
  description: Proportional gain factor, directly gaining the error to compensate the fault (Kp).
  required: false
  default: 1.0
  type: float
ki:

>   description: Integration factor, reducing offset fault over time (Ki).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: Integration factor, reducing the offset fault over time (Ki).
```

  required: false
  default: 0.1
  type: float
kd:
  description: Differential factor, damping the overshoot (Kd).
  required: false
  default: 0.0
  type: float
direction:

>   description: Regulation direction. When 'direct', output will increase to decrease fault, when 'reverse' output will decrease to decrease fault.

Reviewer: ``` suggestion
  description: Regulation direction. When 'direct', the output will increase to decrease fault. When 'reverse', the output will decrease to decrease fault.
```

ha_iot_class: Local Polling
ha_domain: pid_controller
ha_platforms:
  - number
ha_integration_type: integration
---

The `pid_controller` platform is a `number`. It can be used to control a number entity output to regulate a sensor value to a specific setpoint. The value of the number entity is the setpoint. As a sensor, any numerical sensor entity can be used. If two sensors are configured, the PID controller will act as a differential controller, using the difference between the two sensor values as input signal.
The value for the output number entity will be calculated using the Proportional–Integral–Derivative algorithm (PID, See [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PID_controller]). The implementation of the PID controller contains bumpless operation, and is prevented against integral windup by clipping of the output value to the minimum and maximum of the corresponding output number entity. 
This controller is typically useful in regulated systems. For example to regulate the speed of a water pump in a heat collector to keep the temperature difference between the outgoing and incomming water stream on a certain level, so that the heat collector will perform optimally.

> Setting up the optimal parameters for a PID controller can be a though job. Depending on your particalar job, you might already know more or less what the parameters should be. If required, you could use [manual tuning][https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PID_controller#Manual_tuning] to find optimal parameters. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting up the optimal parameters for a PID controller can be a tough job. Depending on your particular job, you might already know more or less what the parameters should be. If required, you could use [manual tuning][https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PID_controller#Manual_tuning] to find optimal parameters. 
```

> - For kp, start with a small number (1) and gradually make it bigger if you see that the direct reaction of the controller is too low. Increase the kp, until the output oscilates, than set it to half of this value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For kp, start with a small number (1) and gradually make it bigger if you see that the direct reaction of the controller is too low. Increase the kp, until the output oscillates, then set it to half of this value.
```

> - For ki, keep this number to 0 until kp is set. Than start with a very small number (0.01). If you see that the reaction over time is only slowly rising, than increase it, until the controller regulates to the sepoint in a reasonalble amount of time. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For ki, keep this number to 0 until kp is set. Then, start with a very small number (0.01). If you see that the reaction over time is only slowly rising, then increase it, until the controller regulates to the setpoint in a reasonable amount of time. 
```

> - For kd, keep this number to 0 until kp and ki are set. Now you can use the kd to prevent the regulator from overshoot. Only increase in small steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For kd, keep this number to 0 until kp and ki are set. Now, you can use the kd to prevent the regulator from overshooting. Only increase in small steps.
```
